=== 1. Introduction to ML.pdf ===
Ruxandra Stoean
rstoean@inf.ucv.ro
ruxandra.stoean@e-uvt.ro
Introduction to Machine Learning
Intelligent machine
 A machine that can be programmed to act like a human
 A machine that can be taught to learn like a human

What is Machine Learning?
Definitions
 “The field of study that gives computers the ability to 
learn without being explicitly programmed.”                  
– Arthur Samuel (1959)
 “A computer program is said to learn from experience E 
with respect to some class of tasks T and performance 
measure P , if its performance at tasks in T , as measured 
by P , improves with experience E.”                                   
– Tom M. Mitchell (1999) 
 “A subset of artificial intelligence focused on developing algorithms and
statistical models that enable computers to learn from data and improve
their performance on specific tasks without explicit programming.
 It involves collecting and preparing data, designing mathematical models,
training the models on labeled data, evaluating their performance on new
data, and deploying them for predictions or decision-making.
 It encompasses supervised learning (learning from labeled data),
unsupervised learning (discovering patterns in unlabeled data), and
reinforcement learning (learning through interaction with an
environment).
 Its applications span a wide range of fields, revolutionizing technology
and problem-solving across domains like image recognition, natural
language processing, recommendation systems, and autonomous
vehicles.”
– ChatGPT
https://stablediffusionweb.com/

Applications. Autonomous vehicles
 Waymo from Google
 https://www .youtube.com/watch?v=0kJPDg207oc
 Microsoft
 https://www .youtube.com/watch?v=zkfrkgtrLdo
Medical diagnosis support
 MedGemma - Hugging Face
 Image classification, text analysis, report generation, patient triage
 https://huggingface.co/spaces/google/appoint-ready
 Microsoft AI Diagnostic Orchestrator (MAI-DxO)
 304 initial real cases from the New England Jou

=== 2. Supervised learning. Linear models.pdf ===
Ruxandra Stoean
Supervised learning. Linear models
Supervised learning
 Concept
 Input data with available output values
 Learn the input – output association
 Prediction on the target of new data
 Classification
 Output grouped in two or more classes
 Qualitative output (discrete, factor, categorical, ordered 
categorical)
 Prediction on the class of new data
 Regression
 Quantitative output (continuous)
 Prediction on the target numerical value for new input
Classification
A
A
B
?
Input Output
Association
Regression
0.2
?
Input Output
Association
0.4
0.9
Classification, 
regression
Training data (known 
output)
T est data 
(unknown output)
ModelLearning
P
r
e
d
i
c
t
i
o
n
Supervised learning
 A data set - pairs of the type (input, output)
 The input is a sequence of values for the data attributes
 The output is a confirmed decision
 Every record (object, example, vector) is described by a number 
of attributes with values from a discrete or continuous domain.
 The targets are either all discrete (classification), or continuous 
(regression).
Definitions
 Given a data set of m records {x1, x2, …, xm}, where 
 every data point is defined by n attributes 𝐱𝐢 ∈ 𝑅𝑛 
 each has an associated outcome y1, …, ym
 Discrete outcome y -> classification
 Continuous outcome y -> regression
 A supervised learning task is to build a model that 
 learns the association between x and y
 and predicts the outcome for new data points.
The model and the data
 The data set is split in three distinct subsets:
 The training set
 The validation set
 The test set (data output is hidden)
 The algorithm learns the association between every training data 
point and its output (training phase).
 The obtained model: 
 tested on the validation set to measure its prediction error
 Parameter tuning
 Variable selection
 tested on the test set to assess the generalization ability
TESTTRAINING VALIDATION
The loss function
 Loss measures how much the model learns the I

=== 3. Support vector machines.pdf ===
Support vector machines (SVM)
Ruxandra Stoean
Additional bibliography
 Simon O. Haykin , Neural Networks and Learning Machines
(3rd Edition), Prentice Hall, 2008
 Bernhard Scholkopf, Alexander J. Smola, Learning with
Kernels: Support V ector Machines, Regularization,
Optimization, and Beyond, MIT Press, 2018
 Catalin Stoean, Ruxandra Stoean, Support V ectorMachines
and Evolutionary Algorithms for Classification: Single or
T ogether?,Intelligent Systems Reference Library,Volume 69,
Springer, 2014.
What is an SVM?
 V erypowerful tools in:
 Classification
 Handwriting recognition
 Object recognition
 Speech recognition
 T ext categorization
 Generically binary – methods to extend to
more classes
 Regression
 A type of supervised learning machine
• Training phase: learning 
(example   ->   label)
• Test phase: prediction
(new example  ->     ?)
Binary classification
 A training data set
 A family of functions
 Find parameters t to learn the optimal correspondence between
every x and y
xi yi (-1 or 1)f
t
 miii yx ,...,2,1)},( =
n
i Rx 
}1,1{ +−iy
 Ttft |
}1,1{: +−→ n
tf
Learning within SVM
Linear separable
Linear non-separable
Linear support vector machines
Nonlinear support vector machines
denotes   +1
denotes   -1
Linear support vector machines
x = Number of tasks solved for homework
y = Hours 
spent on 
final 
project
Problem: Will I get a good mark in this exam? Y es
No
Linear SVM for separable data
How can
these data be
classified?
Any of these could be
good…
But which one is the
best?
denotes   +1
denotes   -1
Linear SVM for separable data
How can
these data be
classified?
Any of these could be
good…
But which one is the
best?
denotes   +1
denotes   -1
Problem: Many solutions! 
Some very bad.
Task: From available data, 
select the hyperplane that 
separates well “in general”
Linear SVM for separable data
The existence of a hyperplane of 
separation with the equation:
0, =− bxw
w
w
b
 0| =− bxwx
denotes   +1
denotes   -1
• w – vector of weig

=== 4. Neural networks.pdf ===
Ruxandra Stoean
Neural networks (NN)
Additional bibliography
 Simon O. Haykin , Neural Networks and Learning Machines 
(3rd Edition), Prentice Hall, 2008
 Charu C. Aggarwal, Neural Networks and Deep Learning: A 
T extbook, Springer, 2018
 Christopher M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern 
Recognition, Oxford University Press, 1996
Modelling the human brain
 Artificial neural networks simulate the mode of neural 
interaction within the human brain, directed towards 
learning:
 Base units – neurons
 Connections between them – synapses
 The intensities (weights) of the synapses determine the 
performance of learning.

Artificial neuron McCulloch-Pitts
 x – input vector
 w – synaptic 
weights
 b – bias
x1
x2
xn
𝑧 = 𝑤 ∙ 𝑥 + 𝑏
w1
w2
wn
 z – linear combination unit
 𝜑 – activation function of the neuron
 Output 
𝜑(𝑧)
𝜑(𝑧)
Structure of a neural network
 Input neurons (units) – input layer (input data attributes)
 Hidden neurons in the black-box of learning (inside data 
components to be learnt)
 In one or more hidden layers
 The output of a layer becomes the input for the next layer
 Output neurons – output layer (network output - classes/response)
 The (supervised) learning starts from the problem data and 
optimizes the weights of the neurons on the base of the difference 
between the predicted and the real response.
Simple NN architecture
Input layer
Hidden layer
Output layer
 Example with 1 hidden 
layer, 3 input neurons, 4 
units in the hidden layer and 
1 output
General NN architecture
https://stanford.edu/~shervine/teaching/cs-229
NN Flow
 Batches of input data are given in the input layer
 Batch size – amount of data passed in one forward pass iteration
 Neurons are multiplied by their weights
 The product is further transformed by the activation function
 The new collection of neurons are fed to the next layer
 The output of the last layer – the prediction – is compared to the 
output -> the loss -> to be minimized
 W eights are initiall

=== 5.1 Decision trees.pdf ===
Ruxandra Stoean
Decision Trees (DT)
Additional bibliography
 Leo Breiman, Jerome Friedman, Charles J. Stone, R.A.
Olshen, Classification and Regression Trees, Chapman and
Hall/CRC, 1984
 Clinton Sheppard, Tree-based Machine Learning Algorithms:
DecisionTrees,Random Forests, and Boosting, 2017
 Lior Rokach, Oded Maimon, Data Mining with Decision Trees:
Theory and Applications (Second Edition), W orldScientific,
2014
Introduction
 V ery appreciated technique :
 Possibility to visualize the model learning the data
 White-box learning, as opposed to support vector machines, 
neural networks (black box)
 Data type independent
 The learning procedure: 
 Training data are recursively partitioned
 Process stops when homogeneous terminal nodes are obtained 
(classes for classification or thresholds for regression)

Algorithms
 ID3 – categorical features; greedy split by largest
information gain for classification; pruning after tree
completion
 C4.5 – in addition, also for continuous features, by
partitioning into discrete intervals; output converted to IF-
THEN rules, rule accuracy gives order of application
 C5.0 – increased accuracy; smaller rule sets
 CART – in addition, also for regression; no rule sets
DT structure
 Every internal node expresses a test in relation to an 
attribute of the problem, which partitions the objects.
 Attributes: discrete or continuous
 If continuous, a threshold is used for partitioning
 Every edge signifies the partition resulting after the 
application of the test that corresponds to that node
 T erminal (leaf) nodes represent the dominant class/group 
that resulted on that branch
Node split criterion
 The measure of an efficient partitioning of the data in the 
current node, on the basis of a pair (attribute, value), is given 
by the following criteria: 
 Classification
 Gini index -> minimum
 CART
 Information gain -> maximum
 i.e., entropy -> minimum
 ID3, C4.5, C5.0
 Regression
 Sum of squared errors
Algorith

=== 5.2 Ensemble methods.pdf ===
Ensemble learning
Ruxandra Stoean
Further bibliography
 Leo Breiman, Bagging Predictors, Machine Learning , vol. 24,
issue 2, pp. 123-140, 1996
 Y oav Freund, Rober E. Schapire, Experiments with a new
boosting algorithm, 13th International Conference on Machine
Learning, 148–156,Morgan Kaufmann, 1996
 Leo Breiman, Random Forests, Machine Learning 45(1), 5-32,
2001.
 Gautam Kunapuli, Ensemble Methods for Machine Learning,
Manning, 2023
Ensemble learning
 Several base learners are trained and their predictions are
combined.
 The way of application of the learners may take place at
several levels.
 Classical approaches:
 Bagging
 Boosting
 Random forests
medium.com
Bagging
 Short for Bootstrap AGGregatING.
 The training data set of m samples is split into b parts (bags).
 Every subset has the same number of m elements.
 The data from each subset are sampled with replacement.
 The base learner is trained on each subset.
 The b constructed models vote the output for new test data:
 The mean of the outputs for the b models - for regression
 The class with most appearances in the predictions of the b models - 
for classification
 Examples not selected (out-of-bag) are used to estimate the
generalization error.
Package R ipred
 The base learner is a decision tree (bagged tree).
 In this sense package rpart is called.
 If the output is seen as factor, classification is considered.
 If it is continuous, regression is in place.
 Parameter nbagg specifies the desired number of bags – default 
25.
 m samples are taken in each bag
 Parameter coob=true specifies the scope to compute an 
estimation of the generalization error (out-of-bag estimation)
Code

Result

Python. Data processing WDBC
 For the Wisconsin original data set with 9 attributes and 699 
records, we will have to read the .csv file.
 In the collection available from UCI, missing values are 
denoted by ‘?’
 Their transformation to 0 will be performed through the use 
of applymap and the a

=== 6. Performance evaluation.pdf ===
Performance evaluation
Ruxandra Stoean
Further bibliography
 N. Japkowicz, M. Shah, Evaluating Learning Algorithms,
Cambridge University Press, 2011
 T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman, The Elements of
Statistical Learning, Springer Series in Statistics, 2001
 C. Huyen, Designing Machine Learning Systems: An Iterative 
Process for Production-Ready Applications, O'Reilly, 2022
Directions
 Performance measures
 Classification
 Regression
 Error estimation
 Statistical significance
Accuracy / Error rate
 The two complementary measures give an insight over the 
general performance.
 Accuracy is computed as the ratio between the amount of data 
labelled correctly and the total number of examples 
 The error rate is the ratio between the amount of samples labelled 
incorrectly and the total number of samples
 Disadvantages in the cases when:
 Data with class imbalance
 Different misclassification costs for each class
Confusion matrix
 For k classes, a matrix of k × k
 The element at position (i, j) gives the amount of data of class 
i that the classifier labels as j
 Generically, for two classes (positive and negative labels)
 N = TN + FP , P = FN + TP
Predicted negative Predicted positive
Real negative True negative (TN) False positive (FP)
Real positive False negative (FN) True positive (TP)
Performance measures for a single 
class of interest 1/2
 Class of interest denoted by the positive.
 True-positive rate (TPR) gives the proportion of data of class 
i that are also labelled as i by the classifier.
 𝑇𝑃𝑅=
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁
 False-positive rate (FPR) – proportion of data that do not 
belong to class i but are labelled with that class.
 𝐹𝑃𝑅=
𝐹𝑃
𝐹𝑃+𝑇𝑁
Performance measures for a single 
class of interest 2/2
 In the binary case, the two measures can be also defined for the 
opposite, negative class.
 True-negative rate 𝑇𝑁𝑅 =
𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑃
 False-negative rate 𝐹𝑁𝑅 =
𝐹𝑁
𝐹𝑁+𝑇𝑃
 TPR is also called sensitivity (or recall).
 TNR is also named specificity.
Like

=== 7. Feature selection & parameter tuning.pdf ===
Feature selection & parameter tuning
Ruxandra Stoean
Further bibliography
 M. Kuhn, K. Johnson, Feature Engineering and Selection
(Chapman & Hall/CRC Data Science Series), Chapman & 
Hall/CRC Data Science Series, 2021
 V . Bolón-Canedo, A. Alonso-Betanzos, Recent Advances in 
Ensembles for Feature Selection, Intelligent Systems Reference
Library, Springer, 2018
 E. Bartz, T . Bartz-Beielstein, M. Zaefferer, O. Mersmann, 
Hyperparameter Tuning for Machine and Deep Learning with R: 
A Practical Guide, Springer, 2023
 L. Owen, Hyperparameter Tuning with Python: Boost your
machine learning model's performance via hyperparameter 
tuning, Packt Publishing, 2022
Feature selection
Feature selection
 Data could have 10 000 descriptive features
 Their number should be reduced to 1000 (or 100) to apply a
model
 Which 1000 attributes should be kept?
 This is feature selection
Features (independent variables) Dependent variable
Why needed?
doi:10.3966/199115592017062803014
 Sometimes performance decreases when the number of features 
is high
 The curse of dimensionality 
 The space volume increases rapidly, data become sparse
 More data samples will be needed
Increase in noise
 Some additional features can only increase noise
 E.g. other features in Pima diabetes: favorite music, hair color
 Models could guide learning towards the new attributes
 They could find correlations only true for the training set, and 
not generalizable to new data
 More features imply more complex models
 More weights for a neural network
 More nodes in decision trees
 More trees in random forests etc.
 Increased search space => harder search
Reasons for feature selection
 T o improve performance (in terms of accuracy, speed)
 For data vizualization, if possible
 T o reduce dimensionality and eliminate noise
 Simpler models are easier to interpret
 Better generalization by reducing overfitting
 Variable redundancy
 Feature selection is the process of choosing an (almost) opt

=== Deep learning. Convolutional neural networks, transfer, semantic segmentation, generative.pdf ===
Ruxandra Stoean
Deep learning for image processing

Further bibliography
 Ian Goodfellow et al, Deep Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine 
Learning series), MIT Press, 2016 http://www .deeplearningbook.org/
 John Kelleher, Deep Learning (MIT Press Essential Knowledge series), 2019
 Charu Aggarwal, Neural Networks and Deep Learning: A T extbook 2nd ed, 
Springer, 2023
 Aston Zhang et al, Dive into Deep Learning, Cambridge University Press, 
2023
 Simon Prince, Understanding Deep Learning, MIT Press, 2023
 Jonah Gamba, Deep Learning Models, A Practical Approach for Hands-On 
Professionals, 2024

https://www .kdnuggets.com/2017/08/first-steps-learning-deep-learning-image-classification-keras.html
Definitions
 “For most flavors of the old generations of learning algorithms … performance will plateau. … deep 
learning … is the first class of algorithms … that is scalable. … performance just keeps getting better as 
you feed them more data.” - Andrew Ng
 “The hierarchy of concepts allows the computer to learn complicated concepts by building them out of 
simpler ones. If we draw a graph showing how these concepts are built on top of each other, the graph is deep, 
with many layers. For this reason, we call this approach to AI deep learning.” – Ian Goodfellow
 “Deep learning [is] … a pipeline of modules all of which are trainable. … deep because [has] multiple 
stages in the process of recognizing an object and all of those stages are part of the training” -Yann LeCun
 “At which problem depth does Shallow Learning end, and Deep Learning begin? Discussions with DL experts 
have not yet yielded a conclusive response to this question. […], let me just define for the purposes of this 
overview: problems of depth > 10 require Very Deep Learning. ” - Jurgen Schmidhuber
https://machinelearningmastery.com/what-is-deep-learning/

“The more I read, the more I acquire, 
the more certain I am that I know nothing.”
― V oltaire

Frameworks for implementing deep learning


=== Deep learning. Recurrent networks & transformers.pdf ===
Ruxandra Stoean
Deep learning for time series and text processing. 
Recurrent networks and transformers
Further bibliography
 A. K.Tyagi, A. Abraham, Recurrent Neural Networks: Concepts and Applications, CRC 
Press, 2022
 F. M. Salem, Recurrent Neural Networks: From Simple to Gated Architectures, Springer, 
2022
 D. Rothman, Transformers for Natural Language Processing: Build, train, and fine-tune 
deep neural network architectures for NLP with Python, Hugging Face, and OpenAI's 
GPT-3, ChatGPT , and GPT-4, Packt, 2022
 S. Ozdemir, Quick Start Guide to Large Language Models: Strategies and Best Practices 
for Using ChatGPT and Other LLMs, Addison-W esley, 2023
 S. Raschka, Build a Large Language Model (From Scratch), Manning, 2024
Recurrent networks
The persistence of memory
 Traditional neural networks (NN) unable to remember 
information collected over time
 Consequent appearance of recurrent neural networks (RNN)
 Short-term memory
 Long short-term memory networks (LSTM)
 Gated recurrent units (GRU)
 W eights shared across time
 Loss of all time steps is the summed loss at each time step
 Backpropagation at each time step, considering the previous 
time steps

LSTM
 S. Hochreiter& J. Schmidhuber, Neural Computation, 1997
 Applications to speech and text prediction, video action recognition, time series 
prediction
 Capable of learning long-term dependencies in the data
 Chain-like structure with a repeating module of interacting neural layers
 xt – input, ht – hidden state output
 Concentrate on the relevant information through its gates that decide which to keep
https://colah.github.io/
1. The cell state
 Similar to a “conveyer belt” where the transport “products” = information for the 
network
 Information can be added to or removed from the cell state through gates.
https://colah.github.io/
2. Gates
 A sigmoid NN layer + a multiplication pointwise operation
 The sigmoid has an output in the interval [0, 1] giving the amount of informatio

